File types and data types to support obs-x-feature use cases (#1261)
vitessce/vitessce: docs/blog/2022-07-16-obs-feature.mdx

Likewise, we have been re-purposing our cell-x-gene functionality for cell-x-antigen data generated by CODEX experiments by adding function parameters that override default strings like `'gene'` rendered in plot titles and axis labels. (A similar problem arises for SLIDE-seq data which captures `bead`-level observations rather than `cell`-level ones.)
In general, a multi-modal dataset may contain gene expression _and_ antigen quantifications for the same cells, at which point this override approach fails.
-->

Meanwhile, the HuBMAP Consortium moved into its second phase, adding new labs and contributors, and generating a wide range of multi-modal datasets using technologies like SNARE-seq.
In parallel, the wider single-cell data analysis community is moving toward the paradigm of the **observation-x-feature** matrix (or **FOM**, in the [Feature and Observation Matrix Schema Working Group](https://github.com/single-cell-data/mams/) terminology; as implemented in data structures like [AnnData](https://anndata.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)), a generalization of the more specific cell-x-gene expression matrix that is typically produced by transcriptomics experiments.

> Emerging formats such as [MuData](https://mudata.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) are taking this paradigm yet further to support multi-modal use cases via container data structures that hold _multiple_ observation-x-feature matrices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Emerging formats such as [MuData](https://mudata.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) are taking this paradigm yet further to support multi-modal use cases via higher-level data structures that hold _multiple_ AnnData objects.
```

(unless that is wrong, but nice to highlight the interoperability)

-->

The problem then arose that the Vitessce code was tightly coupled to the more specific cell-x-gene ideas, preventing straightforward usage with non-transcriptomics or multi-modal datasets.
This prompted the need for a major update to realize the FOM paradigm in Vitessce.
In our latest update, we have changed how we represent data and how we configure mappings between data and views.
These changes allow Vitessce to support visualization of datasets containing one or more observation-x-feature matrices.

## Support for the FOM paradigm in Vitessce

In the latest minor version `1.3.0` of the `vitessce` JavaScript package, we have made several changes to support datasets containing observation-x-feature matrices.
With these changes, we hope that the straightforward FOM mental model can be leveraged when preparing and configuring data to be used with Vitessce.

### View config schema

The changes described here are reflected in the latest view config schema [version](/docs/view-config-json/#version) `1.0.13`.

> We now also include a tool to [compare](https://observablehq.com/@keller-mark/vitessce-config-version-diff?ref=main&prev=1.0.11&next=1.0.12) view config schema versions by diff-ing the JSON objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We now also offer a tool to [compare](https://observablehq.com/@keller-mark/vitessce-config-version-diff?ref=main&prev=1.0.11&next=1.0.12) view config schema versions by diff-ing the JSON objects.
```

### Coordination types and entity types

[Coordination type](/docs/coordination-types/) names have been updated to use `obs` and `feature` (rather than `cell` and `gene`, respectively).

We introduce the coordination types `obsType`, `featureType`, and `featureValueType` to enable entity types to be specified. For example, if we performed an scATAC-seq experiment and want to visualize the cell-x-peak matrix in the heatmap, then the following coordination values should be configured (via the coordination space) for our heatmap view:

```js
obsType: 'cell',
featureType: 'peak',
featureValueType: 'count'
```

> This way, we can render more accurate strings like `'100 cells x 200 peaks'` in the interface (as opposed to the more abstract `'100 observations x 200 features'`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With these new types, we can render more accurate strings like `'100 cells x 200 peaks'` in the interface (as opposed to the more abstract `'100 observations x 200 features'`).
```

Views may also leverage specific `featureType` values like `'gene'` to offer specific analysis functionality such as differential gene expression testing (which alternatively may be hidden from the user when `featureType === 'peak'`).

It is also common in single-cell workflows to obtain results from matrix factorization- or topic model-based analyses, which can often be stored as observation-x-feature matrices.
In such a case, we might use `featureType: 'topic'` to describe the columns of the matrix.

### Data types

[Data types](/docs/data-types-file-types/) no longer assume observation types like `cell`.

Instead, to facilitate re-use across observation types, we have split up each of the former data types into multiple more minimal data types.

> For example, `obsLocations` stores (x, y) coordinates per observation, `obsEmbedding` stores (dim1, dim2) coordinates per observation for a given embedding type, and `obsSegmentations` stores polygon vertices per observation.

Author: That is how I wrote it originally, but then I decided maybe it is important to make the blog post relevant to those who have never used Vitessce previously. I am trying to keep the before/after comparisons under the `Migration` section of the post.

### File definitions

[File definitions](/docs/view-config-json/#files) no longer require the `type` (data type) property.
Instead, we now store a [mapping](https://github.com/vitessce/vitessce/blob/main/src/app/constant-relationships.js) from `fileType`s to data types internally and do the lookup automatically.

### Joint file types

[Joint file types](/docs/data-types-file-types/#joint-file-types) can now be defined via functions which expand one file definition into an array of file definitions.

### Exported constant values

Exported [constants](/docs/constants/) have been updated to reflect the changes to file types, data types, and coordination types as described here.

While no longer documented, we will continue to export the old constants for backwards compatibility (since their values will remain useful when  defining view configs corresponding to previous schema versions).
However, instead of implementing them using plain JS objects, deprecated constants will be exposed via [proxies](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Proxy) which log deprecation messages to the console when accessed.

### VitessceConfig constructor

> The [VitessceConfig](/docs/view-config-js/) constructor now requires `schemaVersion` as its first parameter.

Author: > Is this a common idiom?

We already require the `version` property in the JSON schema, so I do not think requiring it here is much different.
I think it is similar to Vega/Vega-Lite's  [`$schema`](https://vega.github.io/vega/docs/specification/ ) property.

I suppose Vitessce could accept only the current schema but then, exactly, it would be painful to upgrade Vitessce if you have many configs. With `version` we can handle schema upgrades automatically because it indicates which version of the schema (and the exact Vitessce behavior) was assumed at the time the config was written.

This will help us to understand which schema version the config was constructed against, enabling better warning messages and error handling.
For instance, the API may show warnings or throw errors when passed invalid constants based on the specified view config schema version. New coordination types like `obsType` would be invalid when using an older schema version such as `1.0.7`.
We intend to update the constructors in R and Python to enforce this requirement as well.

This is a breaking change, but it should be easy to update existing code to pass a `schemaVersion` value (see notes on [backwards compatibility](#backwards-compatibility)) below).

For new code, we recommend specifying the latest view config schema version:

```js

> const vc = new VitessceConfig("1.0.13", "My config");

Author: That is a good point, we could even allow package.json-style semantic version notation like `"^1.0.0"`

> const vc = new VitessceConfig("1.0.13", "My config");

Author: We would just have to define up front what it means for a schema version update to be patch, minor, or major.

> const vc = new VitessceConfig("1.0.13", "My config");

Author: About the positional arguments, that is a good point, I have changed them to named arguments instead.

```

For a full list of valid `schemaVersion` values, see the table of [schema versions](/docs/view-config-json/#version).

### Python and R support

The changes described here are not yet reflected in the Vitessce Python and R packages. 

We will now work to update the code for generating view configs in Python and R and will release new versions once finished.

All Vitessce packages will continue to be backwards compatible with previous view config schema versions.

## Next steps

We hope that these changes make it easier to configure Vitessce, [prepare data](/docs/data-file-types/) for use with Vitessce, and develop [plugins](/docs/dev-plugins/).

> While we want to make Vitessce general enough to facilitate many use cases, we recognize the danger of going overboard with abstractions (e.g., preventing users from easily configuring Vitessce), and hope that our implementation strikes a useful balance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While we want to make Vitessce general enough to facilitate many use cases, we recognize the danger of over abstraction (e.g., preventing users from easily configuring Vitessce), and hope that our implementation strikes a useful balance.
```

Such mappings could also be specified in the opposite direction to capture which organelles belong to which cells.
Again, if you have feedback about this or other features, we would love to hear!

## Backwards compatibility

The remaining sections are meant for developers looking to make existing code compatible with the latest version of the `vitessce` JavaScript package.

### VitessceConfig constructor calls

If you are already using the `VitessceConfig` class in existing code (package version `1.2.0` or earlier), and you would like to upgrade to the new version while keeping the previous behavior:
`"1.0.7"` was the schema version that was previously hard-coded.

```diff
- const vc = new VitessceConfig("My config");
+ const vc = new VitessceConfig("1.0.7", "My config"); // Previous behavior
```

### VitessceConfigDataset addFile calls

The parameters of the [`addFile`](/docs/view-config-js/#addfileurl-filetype-coordinationvalues-options) method have changed.
Data type is no longer an argument, so file type has moved to the second argument.
The new argument `coordinationValues` is now the third argument.
The fourth argument is now `options`.

> The `coordinationValues` and `options` parameters are optional: `null` can be passed when not applicable.

Author: This is a good point, I have changed them to named arguments instead.

```diff
- dataset.addFile('http://example.com/my_cells.json', dt.CELLS, ft.CELLS_JSON);
+ dataset.addFile('http://example.com/my_cells.json', ft.CELLS_JSON, null, null);
```

### Versioned documentation

> While Vitessce still supports them, we have removed the following file types from the documentation, as we do not encourage their use in new code:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While still supported by Vitessce, the following file types have been removed from the documentation, as we do not encourage their use in new code:
```

Some additional use cases that we are excited about:
- using `obsType: 'nucleus'` to accurately refer to observations from [single-nucleus](https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.4407) experiments (similarly `obsType: 'nucleolus'`, `obsType: 'mitochondria'`, etc. as technologies for [isolating subcellular components](https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.202005793) mature)
- using `featureType: 'isoform'` to accurately refer to features from [isoform-resolved](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-022-01231-3) sequencing- and FISH-based experiments
- using `featureType: 'topic'` and `featureValueType: 'probability'` to enable visualization of [topic model-based](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0367-1) analysis results

## Demos

The following examples showcase how the updates described here can be used to perform integrative visualization of single-cell data.

<DemoList
  configs={configs}
  small
  subset={[
    'codeluppi-2018',
    'codeluppi-2018-via-zarr',
    'eng-2019',
    'wang-2018',
    'satija-2020',
    'human-lymph-node-10x-visium',
    'habib-2017',
    'marshall-2022',
    'kuppe-2022',
    'combat-2022',
    'meta-2022-azimuth'
  ]}
/>

> <!-- TODO -->

Author: No sorry I did add the demos but forgot to remove the TODO statement
